---
layout: post
date: 2020-04-09 7:03 PM
permalink: "/rr-otsol"
title: 'Recent Read: ‘On the Shortness of Life’ by Seneca'

---
As I embark on my new self-improvement journey (see: previous post), I read Seneca's essay "On the Shortness of Life." I first read this essay in April 2019 and have since read it twice more, each with a different translation. It's fun engaging the essay's arguments in a different voice with each read-through, though this is certainly due to the essay's plain style and length—its translation is more accessible than, say, an epic poem's.

My most recent read of the essay [is translated by Gareth D. Williams](https://archive.org/details/SenecaOnTheShortnessOfLife/mode/2up). Published in _The Complete Works of Lucius Annaeus Seneca_ series by the University of Chicago Press in 2014, this translation is modern, its language clear and quick.

Now, I want to put at front of mind the essay's core ideas and make sense of them internally. There are moments when I read "On the Shortness of Life" that I am led to shortness of breath—as if my soul was being reprimanded for its foolishness.

Seneca begins by describing the tendency of people to complain about life being short, but critiques this complaint by noting how much of life is carelessly squandered without real pursuit. He posits: "the life we are given isn't short but we make it so; we're not ill provided but we are wasteful of life."

He lists the causes of this squandering, which reads as a list of follies. Some causes are based on one's ego—the desire to elevate one's standing in relation to others whether in title, status, or wealth. Others are based on vices—living in response to one's hedonistic calling. Then there are those reasons based on having inconsistent goals, or no goals at all—which is to say that one's life lacks gravity.

Even those who are outwardly successful do not really have a life for themselves; they tend to the needs of other people such as clients or constituents. I get it: it feels good to feel important. Yet even in my own life I can think of those who derive a sense of importance in being busy and productive—but they aren't fulfilled. In fact, they're often complaining about how much they struggle. It's the glorification of equating one's worth with their outputs. So, when Seneca uses the analogy of one's property as worth protecting, he presents a pointed declaration: "Men are thrifty in guarding their private property, but as soon as it comes to wasting time, they are most extravagant with the one commodity for which it's respectable to be greedy." I remain convinced that life isn't about acquiring materials, but experiences.

I am also persuaded by Seneca's argument that a long life in years means little, on two points. First, that there is a difference between having lived long and having long existed. Here, Seneca conjures up my favourite imagery in the essay: that of a boat caught in a storm upon leaving the harbour, carried this way and that, driven in circles by the tempest. It cannot be said that the boat had a long voyage; only that it was long tossed about.

Second, the idea of a long life in years is ultimately foolish. There is no guarantee that one has those years in store. This isn't to say that retirement planning is foolish, but rather the idea of putting off today for tomorrow. As Seneca points out, "\[We\]'re like ordinary mortals in fearing everything, \[we\]'re like immortals in coveting everything." I know I have a tendency to analyse, plan, and overthink my life, yet I do so assuming that all my efforts will lead me to a complete and permanent state of feeling "I've made it."

The essay alludes to the personal lives of Augustus, Cicero, and others to argue that even successful people look forward to the day they can rest. Commentary from the translator cautions taking the historic references literally, as some lack evidence. Still, when I think of how vacation is put on a pedestal in our modern work culture, I can see how ancient rulers might have felt the same way.

Conversely, Seneca describes the unnamed sage who applies wisdom: "Believe me, it's the mark of a great man, and one rising above human weakness, to allow no part of his time to be skimmed off. Accordingly, such a person's life is extremely long because he's kept available for himself the whole of whatever amount of time he had. None of it lay fallow and uncultivated, and none of it was under another's control; for being a most careful guardian of his time, he found nothing worth exchanging for it. And so that man had enough time; but those deprived of much of their life by the public have necessarily had too little." The sage persona is, of course, only an ideal. It's impossible to find nothing worth exchanging one's time for, or to disconnect from one's society, but it's certainly possible to be thoughtful about how we employ our time.

Seneca returns to describing what is vastly more common. He admonishes those who care too much about their appearances; about their collections (flaunting materialism); about sports;  and about hosting banquets (that aren't really leisurely because of the stress that comes with putting on a good show). In short, idle preoccupation is not thoughtful use of one's time. Seneca makes a compelling argument that even those who are pampered and tended to by others are not really living life. For "the truly leisured person is one who is also conscious of his own leisure. But a person who needs a guide to make him aware of his own bodily positions is only half-alive; how can he be in control of any of his time?"

In my latest reading, these points made me think of the practice of mindfulness. As Socrates proclaimed, the unexamined life is not worth living. This is why I believe this blog will be a useful tool for me moving forward. It's a way for me to process what I encounter. Indeed, I'm now reminded of the common regrets of the dying, the chief of which is the desire to have had the courage to live a life true to oneself, and not the life expected by others. (I'll muse on this and the other regrets in another post.)

Anyways, Seneca then continues his essay with three parts (as I interpreted it in my reading): first, he makes a distinction between worthy and unworthy knowledge. What is the point, he asks, in wondering "how many rowers Ulysses had, \[or\] whether the _Iliad_ or the _Odyssey_ was written first," or knowing that "Metellus, in his triumph after conquering the Carthaginians in Sicily, was alone of all Romans in having 120 captured elephants led in procession before his chariot"? Pondering or knowing such things has no positive effect on one's life. (Though I found it ironic that Seneca spends a _bit_ too much time on answering his own questions, as if he couldn't help himself.)

This first part sets up the second: Seneca elevates the study of philosophy as worthy of one's time. It's the knowledge worth acquiring, for one can engage the thinkers throughout _all of time_ to add value to their life. The philosophers of times gone teach with infinite patience and without judgement. It's a pleasing thought, but the essay does not elaborate _to what ends_ the acquired knowledge should be directed.

The final part closes the essay as it began: with an address to Paulinus, Seneca's father-in-law. The essay functions to persuade Paulinus to retire sooner rather than later and to enjoy life. I myself am not so concerned with the historical relationship between the author and the reader, so I'll leave it at that...

This essay means a lot to me because I first read it at a time when I valued my work identity, to the extent that it became self-ruinous. The core ideas led me to seek more humility, to reduce my dependence on others for validation, and to constantly self-reflect on what I sought with my time. Over the past year, I didn't always act accordingly with this new orientation, but I was at least aware of when I faltered.

The truth is, I _do_ know what a fulfilled life for me entails. I just lack the courage and temperance to pursue what's necessary. I think most people are in the same (storm-tossed?) boat, which explains why it's easier to pursue the external aspects (materialism, wealth, status—which are ultimately not the answer) than to sit and have a dialogue with one's internal voice which _does_ have the answer.

Blaise Pascal, about 16 centuries after Seneca's time, claimed: "All of humanity's problems stem from man's inability to sit quietly in a room alone." Since I have a four-day weekend starting tomorrow, I'm going to minimize my use of technology and meditate on courage and temperance.